CHAPTER 1:

SCIENTIFIC PERSPECTIVES

ON SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
AND RECOVERY



10 IC&RE Alcohol and Drug Counselor (adc) Certification Examination Study Guide

INTRODUCTION

At the outset of this study guide it is important to address terminology. Clear language and terminology are
critically important in communicating current understandings of disease, risk factors, diagnosis, prognosis,
treatment options, health, and wellness. Historically, the term “addiction” has been used to describe the most
serious and chronic use of substances. Today, the term “substance use disorder” is preferred and will be widely
used in this publication.

The term “addiction” is often viewed as less preferable in contemporary discussions due to a few key reasons:

1. Stigmatization: The word “addiction” can carry negative connotations and stigma. This stigma can be a
barrier to seeking help, as individuals might fear being judged or labeled negatively.

2. Medical and Psychological Understanding: The understanding of substance use disorders has evolved.
Terms like “substance use disorder” are more precise and reflect a medical and psychological perspective,
focusing on the condition as a complex interplay of biological, psychological, and social factors.

3. Person-First Language: Current use of person-first language removes the definition of people by their
condition (“addict”) and uses person-first language (“person with a substance use disorder”) that
acknowledges their humanity and the complexity of their experience.

4. Recovery and Treatment Focus: Using more neutral and clinical terms can help in focusing on recovery
and treatment rather than the moral or character implications often associated with the term “addiction.”
ge
é
5. Diversity of Experiences: “Addiction” often fails to capture the diversity and complexity of people’s
experiences with substances. Different individuals may have vastly different journeys, and a single term
may not adequately encompass these variations. oa

6. Public Policy and Funding: Language can influence public perception and policy. Using terms that reduce
stigma and emphasize the medical nature of the condition can lead to better support, funding, and
resources for treatment and research.

It is important to note, however, that language and terminology preferences can vary among individuals,
communities, and professionals. Some people may still use the term “addiction” while others prefer more
updated terminology. This study guide will include “addiction” judiciously as research articles and other
publications cited may use this term. These works have contributed to the history of our modern understanding
of substance use and substance use disorders.

In addition, terminology has shifted from the use of “substance abuse.” Today, it is recommended that
substance use be used to describe all substances (including alcohol, illegal or prescription drugs, and other
substances) and that classifications of substance use refer to severity specifiers (e.g., mild, moderate, severe) to
indicate the severity of use.?

The term, problematic substance use means the use of any substance in a manner, situation, amount, or
frequency that causes harm to the person using the substance or to those around them. It replaces substance
misuse. This term generally refers to usage that is considered moderate; however, use at the level of a substance
use disorder is also problematic.

Substance use disorder (SUD) is on the severe end of the continuum. It is uncontrolled use of a substance
despite harmful consequences. People with an SUD have an intense focus on using a certain substance(s) to
the point where the person’s ability to function in day-to-day life becomes impaired. People keep using the
substance even when they know it is causing or will cause problems.”



—

CHAPTER 1: Scientific Perspectives on Substance Use Disorders and Recovery

Lastly, we chose to use the term elient in this publication to represent people accessing and using substance

use related services. There has been recent opposition to the use of “client,” as well as the term “patient,” as
opponents believe it is disempowering and suggests an unequal healthcare relationship. Other terms, such

as “person served,” “consumer,” or “service user,” have been suggested as replacements. It is widespread
practice, however, for therapists and counselors in non-medical, behavioral health settings to use “client,”
while practitioners in other healthcare settings generally use the term “patients.” A search of current practice
publications related to treating substance use disorders shows the use of “client” in current publications from
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA.) Given the familiarity with the term,
current usage, and ease of writing, the term “client” was selected for this publication with the full intent that
this term represents today’s person-centered healthcare practices.

Overall, the commitment of this study guide is to use language that is respectful, non-stigmatizing, and aligns
with current professional understanding.



12 IC&RC Alcohol and Drug Counselor (ADC) Certification Examination Study Guide

CURRENT SCIENTIFIC PERSPECTIVES
ON ADDICTION

Scientific breakthroughs have revolutionized the understanding of substance use disorders. For example, severe
substance use disorders, were once viewed as a moral failing or character flaw but are now understood to be
chronic illnesses characterized by clinically significant impairments in health, social function, and voluntary
control over substance use. Although the mechanisms may be different, SUDs have many features in common
with disorders such as diabetes, asthma, and hypertension. All of these disorders are chronic, subject to relapse,
and influenced by genetic, developmental, behavioral, social, and environmental factors.

The National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA) defines addiction as?

“Addiction is a chronic, relapsing disorder characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use
despite adverse consequences. It is considered as a brain disorder because it involves functional
changes to brain circuits involved in reward, stress, and self-control. Those changes‘may last a

long time after a person has stopped taking drugs.”

The American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) updated their definition of addiction in 2019 to reflect a
modern understanding and acceptance of addiction as a chronic brain disease, the possibility of remission and
recovery, and the roles of prevention and harm reduction in the spectrum of addiction and recovery.‘

“Addiction is a treatable, chronic medical disease involving complex interactions among brain
circuits, genetics, the environment, and an individyal#tife experiences. People with addiction
use substances or engage in behaviors that become compulsive and often continue despite
harmful consequences. Prevention efforts and treatment approaches for addiction are generally
as successful as those for other chronic diseases.”

Repeated substance use can lead to brain changes that challenge a person’s self-control and interfere with their
ability to resist intense urges to take the substance. These brain changes can be persistent, which is why an

SUD is considered a “relapsing” disease. People in recovery from an SUD are at increased risk for returning to
substance use even after years of not taking the substance. Brain imaging studies of people with an SUD show
physical changes in areas of the brain that are critical to judgment, decision-making, learning and memory, and
behavior control.

All addictive substances have powerful effects on the brain. These effects account for the euphoric or intensely
pleasurable feelings that people experience during their initial use of alcohol, drugs or other substances, and
these feelings motivate people to use those substances repeatedly, despite the risks for significant harms.

Theories of Causation and Factors that Influence Addiction

There are many theories about the causes of substance use disorders. Biology, psychology, and social and cultural
elements all interplay in complex ways that result in SUDs. Varying theories weigh the elements differently.
Together they reflect the fact that there is no one path to an SUD, and no one factor that determines an
inevitable outcome. Two general and identifiable sets of views about the causation of addiction have persisted itt
the public domain: biological/disease views and moral views.

The moral model views addiction as a result of personal weakness, initiated for self-gratification and continued
because of an unwillingness or lack of sufficient willpower to stop In this model, problematic behaviors are

seen not as symptoms of a disease or disorder, but rather as the result of bad choices driven by poor character Gr
ethical weakness. This perspective often leads to stigmatization and blame placed on the individual rather than
considering biological, psychological, or socio-environmental factors that might contribute to the substance tne
Proponents of the moral model believe that people with SUDs can and should be held to moral responsibility for


“a
a
“=
“a

CHAPTER 1: Scientific Perspectives on Substance Use Disorders and Recovery

their choices and actions - and, by focusing on proper clinical care, SUDs can be addressed with compassion,
free from blame, negative attitudes, and harsh treatment or punishment.® The moral model, however, has been
largely criticized and replaced by more scientifically grounded models.

Research has revealed more exactly how substances work in the brain, and how SUDs can be successfully
treated to help people stop and resume their productive lives.’ The initial decision to use substances is mostly
voluntary; however, when the use progresses to more regular use, a person’s ability to exert self-control can
become seriously impaired. Today, the disease model of addiction is the prevailing theory - that addiction is an
illness and comes about because of the impairment of healthy neurochemical or behavioral processes. Advances
in neuroscience have helped us understand how substances affect the brain, leading to the recognition that
addiction is a chronic brain disorder that can be treated.

Dr. Nora Volkow, NIDA Director, and colleagues state:

“Neuroscience research has revealed that addiction is a chronic, relapsing disease of the brain
triggered by repeated exposure to drugs in those who are vulnerable because of genetics and
developmental or adverse social exposures. As a result, the reward circuit’s capacity to respond
to reward and motivate actions that are not drug related is decreased, the sensitivity of the
emotional circuits to stress is enhanced, and the capacity to self-regulate is impaired. The result
is compulsive drug seeking and drug taking despite severe harms and an inability to control the
strong urges to consume the drug, even when there is a strong desire to quit.*”

Simply stated, the disease model emphasizes the brain areas and circuits that encode various functions such

as reward and motivation. Brain imaging studies from individuals with a substance use disorder show physical
changes in areas of the brain that are critical to judgment, decision making, learning and memory, and
behavior control. The pattern of use of a substance is chardtterized by the loss of control on substance use-
related behaviors, the pursuance of those behaviors even in the presence of negative consequences, and a strong

motivated activity to continue using. The causation of these behaviors and motivations can be viewed from
psychological to biological-molecular levels?

The disease model has also been criticized. Opponents to this model often claim that the biological
understanding removes personal responsibility and moral culpability for problematic use of substances, and
that individuals will use their “disease” as a “crutch.” Thus, they are neither responsible nor to blame as their
condition is the result of a disease that has taken hold.° Others oppose addiction being labeled as a disease;
that it is an unnecessary and negative frame that distracts from the positive and hopeful messages that can
accompany a full understanding of addiction as a biobehavioral disorder."

Blended model. There is an ongoing debate about whether substance use disorders should be viewed as a moral
failing or as a disease. Some researchers suggest that neither perspective fully captures the complexity, and
that a more nuanced and integrated understanding is needed. We see that scientific advances have contributed
significantly to our understanding of the neurobiological pathways in the brain and their roles in substance
reinforcement, dependence, conditioned responses, craving, and loss of behavioral control.

Yet, it is known that sustained recovery from substance use comes through the empowerment of an individual
to be an “agent” in their own life (meaning the degree to which they are able to make decisions and carry out
actions that they choose for themselves) and the restoration of their belief in their ability to affect change and
progress. It is argued that individuals must want different goals and make different choices to overcome their
SUD, thus the elements of choice and personal responsibility cannot be discounted.” Not all interventions that
help persons with SUDs involve choice - many things will always lie outside of their control - but, choice and
personal responsibility are nonetheless crucial elements in personal change, growth, and recovery.


IC&RC Alcohol and Drug Counselor (ADC) Certification Examination Study Guide

FACTORS AFFECTING INDIVIDUAL VARIABILITY AND VULNERABILITY

The development of an SUD involves complex interactions between the drug’s effects, personal factors like
genetics and health, social relationships, and cultural influences such as attitudes towards alcohol and other
drugs, and their availability. Examining issues like adverse social conditions, childhood experiences, and genetic
differences is crucial to understanding why some people develop SUDs and others don’t.

As with any other disease, vulnerability to developing an SUD differs from person to person. In general, the more
risk factors an individual has, the greater the chance that substances will lead to an SUD. Risk factors can be
impacted by protective factors which are characteristics associated with a lower likelihood of negative outcomes
and can help to reduce a risk factor’s impact. For example, negative life events (risk factors) are associated with
substance use as well as anxiety, depression, and other behavioral health issues. Prevention efforts targeting a
set of risk or protective factors have the potential to produce positive effects.

Genetic Factors. SUDs are heritable and influenced by complex interactions among multiple genes and
environmental factors. Genetic studies have begun to uncover the molecular mechanisms underlying SUDs and
related traits, including other psychiatric conditions with which SUDs frequently co-occur. Scientists estimate
that genes account for between 40 and 60 percent of a person’s risk of developing an:SUD.¥

Gender. Gender significantly impacts the risk of developing an SUD. Both men and women show differences in
their vulnerabilities to various substances and activities, including drugs, sex, food, gambling, internet use, and
physical exercise.* Hormonal differences, particularly the influence of sex hormones, play a significant role in
compulsive behaviors. In addition, the responsiveness to stress and other socio-cultural factors contribute to
sex- and gender-based differences in the development of an SUD. Women experience some issues to a greater
degree than men which add to their vulnerability, such as intimate partner influences and/or violence, mental
health conditions, and higher susceptibility to the addictivé properties of substances, craving, and relapse.

Home and Family. The influence of the home environment is usually most important in childhood. Exposure to
childhood adversity, including family dysfunction, domestic violence, parental substance use, and mental health
conditions, significantly increases the risk for SUDs.” Early sexual assaultive trauma, especially before age 10,
alters neurophysiological functioning in adolescents and young adults which influences the risk of SUDs and
conditions characterized by negative emotion such as depression, anxiety, and phobias.

|
|
(
(
(

Peer and School. Friends and acquaintances have the greatest influence during adolescence. Substance-using
peers can sway even those without risk factors to try alcohol, drugs, or other substances (such as inhalants) for
the first time. Academic failure or poor social skills can put a child further at risk for problematic use.9

Method of Administration. Smoking a substance or injecting it into a vein increases its addictive potential. Each
substance and method of administration carries its own set of risks and potential for progression to an SUD. The
speed of onset, meaning the faster the substance reaches the brain, the more intense the high and the greater
the addictive potential. Intravenous injection delivers the substance directly into the bloodstream, providing

an almost immediate effect. Inhalation, as in smoking, also leads to rapid absorption through the lungs. These
methods can increase the risk of developing an SUD compared to slower routes like oral ingestion. The intensity
of the effect can produce a “rush” which can be more reinforcing.

Early Use. Although problematic substance use at any age can lead to an SUD, research shows that the earlier
a person begins to use alcohol, drugs, or other substances, the more likely they are to progress to more serious
use. Young people’s brains are growing and developing until they are their mid-20’s. Early substance use
interferes with ongoing neurodevelopment to trigger neurobiological changes that further augment SUD risk.
In addition, risk-taking and subsequent drug experimentation during adolescence increases the likelihood of
developing an SUD.”°

Survivors of Trauma and Violence: Research has shown that traumatic experiences are associated with both
behavioral health and chronic physical health conditions, especially when those traumatic events occur durityt
childhood. Substance use, mental health conditions, and other risky behaviors are linked with traumatic
experiences.” For example,


CHAPTER 1: Scientific Perspectives on Substance Use Disorders and Recovery

» Problematic substance use is common among individuals exposed to intimate partner violence, including
physical, sexual, and psychological violence. Women who have experienced intimate partner violence are
at-risk for transitioning from moderate use to SUD and demonstrate greater SUD symptom severity.?

» In children, the evidence clearly indicates that childhood trauma has profound and long-lasting effects on
mental health, emotional development, and the risk of substance abuse. Childhood trauma is a tisk factor
for a range of psychiatric disorders and adverse outcomes, including impaired social functioning, poor
physical health, self-injurious behavior, and addiction.?3

» Trauma is associated with neurobiological dysfunction. Cumulative trauma triggers, aggravates, and
increases the recurrence of mental health symptoms and substance use behaviors. This interplay can
result in more complex clinical profiles and worse treatment outcomes.”

Addictive Substances, the Brain, and Behavior2>2°

To understand how addictive substances affect the

brain, it is important to first understand the basic

biology of healthy brain function. The brain is an Here’s how
amazingly complex organ that is constantly at work. brain cells communicate.
Within the brain, a mix of chemical and electrical
processes controls the body’s most basic functions, like
breathing and digestion. These processes also control
how people react to the multitudes of sounds, smells,
and other sensory stimuli around them. They also ab
organize and direct individuals’ highest thinking and
emotive powers so that they can interact with other
people, carry out daily activities, and make complex
decisions. Neurotransinitter

Receptor:

The brain is made of an estimated 86 billion nerve
cells—called neurons—as well as other cell types. Each
neuron has a cell body, an axon, and dendrites. The cell
body and its nucleus control the neuron’s activities.

The axon extends out from the cell body and transmits
messages to other neurons. Dendrites branch out from
the cell body and receive messages from the axons of Prefrontal Cortex
other neurons.

Neurons communicate with one another through
chemical messengers called neurotransmitters. The
neurotransmitters cross a tiny gap, or synapse, between
neurons and attach to receptors on the receiving
neuron. Some neurotransmitters are inhibitory—they
make it less likely that the receiving neuron will carry
out some action. Others are excitatory, meaning that
they stimulate neuronal function, priming it to send
signals to other neurons.

The brain is comprised of many parts with
interconnected circuits that all work together as Extended Amygdata
a team. Different brain circuits are responsible for

coordinating and performing specific functions.

Networks of neurons send signals back and forth to

each other and among different parts of the brain,



16 IC&RC Alcohol and Drug Counselor (A

the spinal cord, and nerves in the

thinking, learning, emotions, and

addiction cycle disrupts the norm

DC) Certification Examination Study Guide

rest of the body (the peripheral nervous system). Others are involved with

al functions of some of these neur

ADDICTIVE SUBSTANCES AND THE BRAIN

disorders:

memory or communicate with muscles, stimulating them into action. The

onal networks.

» The nucleus accumbens, which is involved in motivation and the experience of reward, and

» The dorsal striatum, which is involved in for

The basal ganglia form a key node of the brain’s “
producing the euphoria of the “high.”

the substance, diminishing its sensitivity and making it har

substance.

» The extended amygdala and its sub-regions,

reactions to stress-including behavioral responses like “figh
unease, anxiety, and irritability. This region also interacts with the hypothalamus, an area of the brain

» The prefrontal cortex is located at the

ming habits and other routine behaviors.

reward circuit.” Substances Over-activate this circuit,
But with repeated exposure, the circuit adapts to the presence of

d to feel pleasure from anything besides the

located beneath the basal ganglia, regulate the brain’s

t or flight” and negative emotions like

very front of the brain, over the eyes, and is responsible for

complex cognitive processes described as “executive function.” Executive function is the ability to



CHAPTER 1: Scientific Perspectives on Substance Use Disorders and Recovery

Some drugs like opioids also disrupt other parts of the brain, such as the brain stem, which controls basic

functions critical to life, including heart rate, breathing, and sleeping. This interference explains why overdoses
can cause depressed breathing and death.

THE ACTIONS OF NEUROTRANSMITTERS

Simple activities in everyday life can produce small bursts of neurotransmitters in the brain bringing pleasurable
feelings. Substance use can hijack that process.

Pleasure or euphoria—the high from substances—is still poorly understood but involves surges of chemical
signaling compounds including the body’s natural opioids (endorphins) and other neurotransmitters in parts

of the basal ganglia (the reward circuit). When some substances are taken, they can cause surges of these
neurotransmitters much greater than the smaller bursts naturally produced in association with healthy rewards
like eating, hearing or playing music, creative pursuits, or social interaction.

It was once thought that surges of the neurotransmitter dopamine produced by substantes directly caused the
euphoria, but scientists now think dopamine has more to do with getting people to repeat pleasurable activities
(reinforcement) than with producing pleasure directly.

The feeling of pleasure is how a healthy brain identifies and reinforces beneficial behaviors, such as eating,
socializing, and sex. Our brains are wired to increase the odds that we will repeat pleasurable activities. The
neurotransmitter dopamine is central to this. Whenever the reward circuit is activated by a healthy, pleasurable
experience, a burst of dopamine signals that something important is happening that needs to be remembered.
This dopamine signal causes changes in neural connectivity that make it easier to repeat the activity repeatedly
without thinking about it, leading to the formation of habits.

Just as substances produce intense euphoria, they also produce much larger surges of dopamine, powerfully
reinforcing the connection between consumption of the substance, the resulting pleasure, and all the external

cues linked to the experience. Large surges of dopamine “teach” the brain to seek substances at the expense of
other, healthier goals and activities.

Cues in a person’s daily routine or environment that have become linked with substance use because of changes
to the reward circuit can trigger uncontrollable cravings whenever the person is exposed to these cues, even if
the substance itself is not available. This learned “reflex” can last a long time, even in people who have not used
substances in many years. For example, people who have been living a sober lifestyle for a decade can experience
cravings when returning to an old neighborhood or house where they used substances.

}
i
q
j

ay
q

Some drugs target the brain’s pleasure center How drugs

increase dopamine

Dopamine ——wex-"-

Transporter > Cocaine

Dopamine Receptor

Brain reward .
(dopamine pathways)

While eating food While using cocaine

These brain circuits are important for Typically, doparnine:increases in response to natural rewaards such as food.
natural rewards such as food, music, and-sex When cocaine is taken, dopamine increases are exaggerated, and communication is denied.


18 IC&RC Alcohol and Drug Counselor (ADC) Certification Examination Study Guide

Over time, the brain of someone who problematicaily uses substances adjusts by producing fewer
neurotransmitters in the reward circuit, or by reducing the number of receptors that can receive Signals. As a

result, the person’s ability to experience pleasure from naturally rewarding (i.e., reinforcing) activities is also
reduced.

This is why a person with problematic substance use eventually feels flat, without motivation, lifeless, and/or
depressed, and is unable to enjoy things that were previously pleasurable, Now, the person needs to keep taking

substances to experience even a normal level of reward—which only makes the problem worse, like a vicious
cycle.

Stages and Cycles in the Development of Substance Use Disorders2”

Substance use disorders are chronic relapsing conditions that evolve through various cycles and a continuum

of stages, each characterized by distinct neurobiological and behavioral changes. Understanding these stages is
crucial for effective treatment interventions.

Historically, there have been differing versions of the Stages that lead to SUDs; however, all show similar stages
and associated behaviors. Here are some examples:

» Four stage mode: Use, Misuse, Abuse, Dependency/Addiction

» Five stage model: Experimentation, Regular Use, Risky Use/Abuse, Dependence, Addiction

» Six stage model: Initial use, Abuse, Tolerance, Dependence, Addiction, Relapse

Substance use occurs on a continuum - ranging from no use to beneficial/medicinal use, non~problematic use,
problematic use, harmful use, and substance use disorder. Consider¢his modern depiction of the continuum.

BENEFICIAL NON- PROBLEMATIC POTENTIALLY SUBSTANCE

USE » PROBLEMATIC. USE HARMFUL USE
USE USE DISORDER
Taking a substance for Periodic use without Patterns of risky use Regular patterns ofuse Uncontrolled use of a
an intended use, such hamful side effects or that threaten a that are leading to substance despite
as medicinal impacts person’s health or harmful impacts harmful consequences

safety, and the safety
of others

1. No Use to Beneficial/Medicinal Use: Some individuals never use psychoactive substances, while others
may use them for medicinal purposes without any harmful effects or addiction.

2. Non-problematic Use: This involves using substances in ways that are not risky or harmful. For a
significant number of people, substance use does not lead to addiction or problematic behaviors.

3. Problematic Use: This stage is characterized by a pattern of use that begins to have negative impacts on a
person’s life. It includes hazardous or risky use, which can lead to social and personal problems.

4. Harmful Use: This stage involves repetitive substance use that causes physical or psychiatric harm. It is
more severe than problematic use and can lead to significant health and social issues.

5. Substance Use Disorder: This is the most severe stage, where there is a compulsive need to use the
substance despite harmful consequences. It involves a combination of behavioral, cognitive, and

physiological symptoms indicating that an individual continues using the substance despite significant
substance-related problems.



CHAPTER 1: Scientific Perspectives on Substance Use Disorders and Recovery 19

It is important to look at specific behaviors and biological states that

are central to these stages: impulsivity, positive reinforcement, negative
reinforcement, tolerance, dependence, craving, withdrawal, compulsivity,
and recurrence.

Initial substance use usually involves an element of impulsivity or

acting without foresight or regard for the consequences. For example, an
adolescent may impulsively take a first drink, smoke a cigarette, begin
experimenting with marijuana, or succumb to peer pressure to try a party
drug. If the experience is pleasurable, this feeling positively reinforces
the substance use, making the person more likely to take the substance
again.

Another person may take a substance to relieve negative feelings such

as stress, anxiety, or depression. In this case, the temporary relief the
substance brings from the negative feelings negatively reinforces substance
use, increasing the likelihood that the person will use it again.

Importantly, positive and negative reinforcement are not solely driven by
the effects of the substance. Many other environmental and social stimuli
can reinforce a behavior. For example, the approval of peers positively
reinforces substance use for some individuals. Likewise, if drinking or
using drugs with others provides relief from social isolation, substance
use behavior could be negatively reinforced. oe

4
The positively reinforcing effects of substances tend to diminish with
repeated use. This is tolerance which is an alteration of the body’s
responsiveness to alcohol, drugs, and other substances such that higher
doses are required to produce the same effect achieved during initial use.
When an individual develops tolerance, they require a larger dose of the
substance to achieve the same effect that they previously experienced

Impulsivity means to act
without foresight or regard for the
consequences.

Positive reinforcement

refers to the process by which
presentation of a stimulus such as
a drug increases the probability of a
response like drug taking.

Negative reinforcement refers
to the process by which removal of a
stimulus such as negative feelings or

‘emotions increases the probability

of a response like drug taking.

Tolerance refers toa reduced
response to.a substance due to
repeated use. It is an alteration

of the body’s responsiveness to
alcohol, drugs, and other substances
such that higher doses are required
to produce the same effect achieved
during initial use.

with a smaller dose. This physiological change often leads to increased consumption of the substance, which
can contribute to the risk of developing an SUD. Tolerance is a key component in understanding SUDs and is

indicative of the body’s adaptation to the presence of the substance.

Cross-tolerance refers to a phenomenon where tolerance to one substance results in a diminished response to
a second substance, often due to their similar pharmacological effects or mechanisms of action. In other words,
there is a decrease in response to one substance due to exposure to another substance. For example, many
different drugs in the same class of drugs, such as narcotic painkillers (e.g., Vicodin, OxyContin, morphine,
heroin, etc.) are very similar in chemical structure and affect the same group of neurons in the brain. Because
drugs in the same or similar classes work on the same aspects of the central nervous system, it is quite
possible to develop a cross tolerance to drugs in the same class. For example, users with a high tolerance to the
stimulant amphetamine may also exhibit a high tolerance to structurally similar methamphetamine or other

amphetamine-like stimulants.

Physical dependence is a body’s natural reaction when certain substances are used for an extended period. It
encompasses specific physiological and biological changes in the body that occur as it adapts to the continuous

presence of the substance. Craving - an intense and often overwhelming desire or urge to engage in a particular
behavior or consume a substance ~ often occurs daily or with regular binges. The individual experiences intense
psychological preoccupation with getting or using the substance and can develop negative emotional states

marked by anxiety, depression, and restlessness. Except for recalling the euphoria of the substance, craving feels
very bad.



