CHAPTER 1: Scientific Perspectives on Substance Use Disorders and Recovery 19

It is important to look at specific behaviors and biological states that

are central to these stages: impulsivity, positive reinforcement, negative
reinforcement, tolerance, dependence, craving, withdrawal, compulsivity,
and recurrence.

Initial substance use usually involves an element of impulsivity or

acting without foresight or regard for the consequences. For example, an
adolescent may impulsively take a first drink, smoke a cigarette, begin
experimenting with marijuana, or succumb to peer pressure to try a party
drug. If the experience is pleasurable, this feeling positively reinforces
the substance use, making the person more likely to take the substance
again.

Another person may take a substance to relieve negative feelings such

as stress, anxiety, or depression. In this case, the temporary relief the
substance brings from the negative feelings negatively reinforces substance
use, increasing the likelihood that the person will use it again.

Importantly, positive and negative reinforcement are not solely driven by
the effects of the substance. Many other environmental and social stimuli
can reinforce a behavior. For example, the approval of peers positively
reinforces substance use for some individuals. Likewise, if drinking or
using drugs with others provides relief from social isolation, substance
use behavior could be negatively reinforced. oe

4
The positively reinforcing effects of substances tend to diminish with
repeated use. This is tolerance which is an alteration of the body’s
responsiveness to alcohol, drugs, and other substances such that higher
doses are required to produce the same effect achieved during initial use.
When an individual develops tolerance, they require a larger dose of the
substance to achieve the same effect that they previously experienced

Impulsivity means to act
without foresight or regard for the
consequences.

Positive reinforcement

refers to the process by which
presentation of a stimulus such as
a drug increases the probability of a
response like drug taking.

Negative reinforcement refers
to the process by which removal of a
stimulus such as negative feelings or

‘emotions increases the probability

of a response like drug taking.

Tolerance refers toa reduced
response to.a substance due to
repeated use. It is an alteration

of the body’s responsiveness to
alcohol, drugs, and other substances
such that higher doses are required
to produce the same effect achieved
during initial use.

with a smaller dose. This physiological change often leads to increased consumption of the substance, which
can contribute to the risk of developing an SUD. Tolerance is a key component in understanding SUDs and is

indicative of the body’s adaptation to the presence of the substance.

Cross-tolerance refers to a phenomenon where tolerance to one substance results in a diminished response to
a second substance, often due to their similar pharmacological effects or mechanisms of action. In other words,
there is a decrease in response to one substance due to exposure to another substance. For example, many
different drugs in the same class of drugs, such as narcotic painkillers (e.g., Vicodin, OxyContin, morphine,
heroin, etc.) are very similar in chemical structure and affect the same group of neurons in the brain. Because
drugs in the same or similar classes work on the same aspects of the central nervous system, it is quite
possible to develop a cross tolerance to drugs in the same class. For example, users with a high tolerance to the
stimulant amphetamine may also exhibit a high tolerance to structurally similar methamphetamine or other

amphetamine-like stimulants.

Physical dependence is a body’s natural reaction when certain substances are used for an extended period. It
encompasses specific physiological and biological changes in the body that occur as it adapts to the continuous

presence of the substance. Craving - an intense and often overwhelming desire or urge to engage in a particular
behavior or consume a substance ~ often occurs daily or with regular binges. The individual experiences intense
psychological preoccupation with getting or using the substance and can develop negative emotional states

marked by anxiety, depression, and restlessness. Except for recalling the euphoria of the substance, craving feels
very bad.

