CHAPTER 1: Scientific Perspectives on Substance Use Disorders and Recovery

» Problematic substance use is common among individuals exposed to intimate partner violence, including
physical, sexual, and psychological violence. Women who have experienced intimate partner violence are
at-risk for transitioning from moderate use to SUD and demonstrate greater SUD symptom severity.?

» In children, the evidence clearly indicates that childhood trauma has profound and long-lasting effects on
mental health, emotional development, and the risk of substance abuse. Childhood trauma is a tisk factor
for a range of psychiatric disorders and adverse outcomes, including impaired social functioning, poor
physical health, self-injurious behavior, and addiction.?3

» Trauma is associated with neurobiological dysfunction. Cumulative trauma triggers, aggravates, and
increases the recurrence of mental health symptoms and substance use behaviors. This interplay can
result in more complex clinical profiles and worse treatment outcomes.”

Addictive Substances, the Brain, and Behavior2>2°

To understand how addictive substances affect the

brain, it is important to first understand the basic

biology of healthy brain function. The brain is an Here’s how
amazingly complex organ that is constantly at work. brain cells communicate.
Within the brain, a mix of chemical and electrical
processes controls the body’s most basic functions, like
breathing and digestion. These processes also control
how people react to the multitudes of sounds, smells,
and other sensory stimuli around them. They also ab
organize and direct individuals’ highest thinking and
emotive powers so that they can interact with other
people, carry out daily activities, and make complex
decisions. Neurotransinitter

Receptor:

The brain is made of an estimated 86 billion nerve
cells—called neurons—as well as other cell types. Each
neuron has a cell body, an axon, and dendrites. The cell
body and its nucleus control the neuron’s activities.

The axon extends out from the cell body and transmits
messages to other neurons. Dendrites branch out from
the cell body and receive messages from the axons of Prefrontal Cortex
other neurons.

Neurons communicate with one another through
chemical messengers called neurotransmitters. The
neurotransmitters cross a tiny gap, or synapse, between
neurons and attach to receptors on the receiving
neuron. Some neurotransmitters are inhibitory—they
make it less likely that the receiving neuron will carry
out some action. Others are excitatory, meaning that
they stimulate neuronal function, priming it to send
signals to other neurons.

The brain is comprised of many parts with
interconnected circuits that all work together as Extended Amygdata
a team. Different brain circuits are responsible for

coordinating and performing specific functions.

Networks of neurons send signals back and forth to

each other and among different parts of the brain,

