18 IC&RC Alcohol and Drug Counselor (ADC) Certification Examination Study Guide

Over time, the brain of someone who problematicaily uses substances adjusts by producing fewer
neurotransmitters in the reward circuit, or by reducing the number of receptors that can receive Signals. As a

result, the person’s ability to experience pleasure from naturally rewarding (i.e., reinforcing) activities is also
reduced.

This is why a person with problematic substance use eventually feels flat, without motivation, lifeless, and/or
depressed, and is unable to enjoy things that were previously pleasurable, Now, the person needs to keep taking

substances to experience even a normal level of reward—which only makes the problem worse, like a vicious
cycle.

Stages and Cycles in the Development of Substance Use Disorders2”

Substance use disorders are chronic relapsing conditions that evolve through various cycles and a continuum

of stages, each characterized by distinct neurobiological and behavioral changes. Understanding these stages is
crucial for effective treatment interventions.

Historically, there have been differing versions of the Stages that lead to SUDs; however, all show similar stages
and associated behaviors. Here are some examples:

» Four stage mode: Use, Misuse, Abuse, Dependency/Addiction

» Five stage model: Experimentation, Regular Use, Risky Use/Abuse, Dependence, Addiction

» Six stage model: Initial use, Abuse, Tolerance, Dependence, Addiction, Relapse

Substance use occurs on a continuum - ranging from no use to beneficial/medicinal use, non~problematic use,
problematic use, harmful use, and substance use disorder. Consider¢his modern depiction of the continuum.

BENEFICIAL NON- PROBLEMATIC POTENTIALLY SUBSTANCE

USE » PROBLEMATIC. USE HARMFUL USE
USE USE DISORDER
Taking a substance for Periodic use without Patterns of risky use Regular patterns ofuse Uncontrolled use of a
an intended use, such hamful side effects or that threaten a that are leading to substance despite
as medicinal impacts person’s health or harmful impacts harmful consequences

safety, and the safety
of others

1. No Use to Beneficial/Medicinal Use: Some individuals never use psychoactive substances, while others
may use them for medicinal purposes without any harmful effects or addiction.

2. Non-problematic Use: This involves using substances in ways that are not risky or harmful. For a
significant number of people, substance use does not lead to addiction or problematic behaviors.

3. Problematic Use: This stage is characterized by a pattern of use that begins to have negative impacts on a
person’s life. It includes hazardous or risky use, which can lead to social and personal problems.

4. Harmful Use: This stage involves repetitive substance use that causes physical or psychiatric harm. It is
more severe than problematic use and can lead to significant health and social issues.

5. Substance Use Disorder: This is the most severe stage, where there is a compulsive need to use the
substance despite harmful consequences. It involves a combination of behavioral, cognitive, and

physiological symptoms indicating that an individual continues using the substance despite significant
substance-related problems.

