CHAPTER 1:
SCIENTIFIC PERSPECTIVES
ON SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
AND RECOVERY

10
IC&RC Alcohol and Drug Counselor (ADC) Certification Examination Study Guide
INTRODUCTION
At the outset of this study guide it is important to address terminology. Clear language and terminology are
critically important in communicating current understandings of disease, risk factors, diagnosis, prognosis,
treatment options, health, and wellness. Historically, the term "addiction" has been used to describe the most
serious and chronic use of substances. Today, the term "substance use disorder" is preferred and will be widely
used in this publication.

The term "addiction" is often viewed as less preferable in contemporary discussions due to a few key reasons:

1. Stigmatization: The word "addiction" can carry negative connotations and stigma. This stigma can be a
barrier to seeking help, as individuals might fear being judged or labeled negatively.

2. Medical and Psychological Understanding: The understanding of substance use disorders has evolved.
Terms like "substance use disorder" are more precise and reflect a medical and psychological perspective,
focusing on the condition as a complex interplay of biological, psychological, and social factors.

3. Person-First Language: Current use of person-first language removes the definition of people by their
condition ("addict") and uses person-first language ("person with a substance use disorder") that
acknowledges their humanity and the complexity of their experience.

4. Recovery and Treatment Focus: Using more neutral and clinical terms can help in focusing on recovery
and treatment rather than the moral or character implications often associated with the term "addiction."

5. Diversity of Experiences: "Addiction" often fails to capture the diversity and complexity of people's
experiences with substances. Different individuals may have vastly different journeys, and a single term
may not adequately encompass these variations.

6. Public Policy and Funding: Language can influence public perception and policy. Using terms that reduce
stigma and emphasize the medical nature of the condition can lead to better support, funding, and
resources for treatment and research.

It is important to note, however, that language and terminology preferences can vary among individuals,
communities, and professionals. Some people may still use the term "addiction" while others prefer more
updated terminology. This study guide will include "addiction" judiciously as research articles and other
publications cited may use this term. These works have contributed to the history of our modern understanding
of substance use and substance use disorders.

In addition, terminology has shifted from the use of "substance abuse." Today, it is recommended that
substance use be used to describe all substances (including alcohol, illegal or prescription drugs, and other
substances) and that classifications of substance use refer to severity specifiers (e.g., mild, moderate, severe) to
indicate the severity of use.¹

The term, problematic substance use means the use of any substance in a manner, situation, amount, or
frequency that causes harm to the person using the substance or to those around them. It replaces substance
misuse. This term generally refers to usage that is considered moderate; however, use at the level of a substance
use disorder is also problematic.

Substance use disorder (SUD) is on the severe end of the continuum. It is uncontrolled use of a substance
despite harmful consequences. People with an SUD have an intense focus on using a certain substance(s) to
the point where the person's ability to function in day-to-day life becomes impaired. People keep using the
substance even when they know it is causing or will cause problems.²


CHAPTER 1: Scientific Perspectives on Substance Use Disorders and Recovery
11

Lastly, we chose to use the term **client** in this publication to represent people accessing and using substance use related services. There has been recent opposition to the use of "client," as well as the term "patient," as opponents believe it is disempowering and suggests an unequal healthcare relationship. Other terms, such as "person served," "consumer," or "service user," have been suggested as replacements. It is widespread practice, however, for therapists and counselors in non-medical, behavioral health settings to use "client," while practitioners in other healthcare settings generally use the term "patients." A search of current practice publications related to treating substance use disorders shows the use of "client" in current publications from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA.) Given the familiarity with the term, current usage, and ease of writing, the term "client" was selected for this publication with the full intent that this term represents today's person-centered healthcare practices.

Overall, the commitment of this study guide